JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
saying goodbye
to the greatest. Thousands
gather to celebrate
the life of boxing legend
Muhammad Ali in
his home town of Louisville,
Kentucky.
Then:
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
Donald Trump would take us in
the wrong direction
on so many issues we care about.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
Hillary Clinton's Wall Street
agenda will
crush working families.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In a new phase of
the presidential
race, Hillary Clinton and Donald
Trump go
head to head for the first time
as the two
likely nominees.
And it's Friday. Mark Shields
and David Brooks
analyze a full week of news.
Also ahead, it's a big year for
the stage.
With the Tonys around the
corner, we look
at standout stage productions,
including the
record-setting musical
"Hamilton."
BEN BRANTLEY, Chief Theater
Critic, The New
York Times: But it really is
unlike anything
that's come on Broadway before,
and it's drawing
audiences that Broadway hasn't
really brought
in en masse in many years.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The White House
confirmed today
that the military now has
approval to expand
airstrikes in Afghanistan. They
will be in
support of Afghan troops against
the Taliban.
And U.S. ground forces will be
joining Afghan
units on more missions.
At the same time, White House
spokesman Josh
Earnest stressed that the U.S.
will not be
taking on direct combat roles.
JOSH EARNEST, White House Press
Secretary:
We are actually giving our
commanders on the
ground the ability to decide to
do more where
it's appropriate. And that's why
it is not
a change in our mission, but
rather it gives
them the ability to conduct this
mission of
advice and assistance in
slightly more areas,
if our commanders have concluded
that it's
beneficial.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Afghan leaders
have been appealing
for American airpower to resume
backing up
their soldiers. U.S. airstrikes
on the Taliban
largely ended in 2014.
In Syria, food deliveries have
reached the
besieged rebel suburb of
Damascus, for the
first time in four years. U.N.
and Red Crescent
officials entered the town of
Daraya overnight.
It's been under siege by
government forces.
Dozens of convoys brought in
basic food items
and medical supplies. The U.N.
estimates between
4,000 and 8,000 people are
living in Daraya.
The European soccer
championship, Euro 2016,
kicked off today in France, amid
tight security.
The country is still under a
state of emergency
after terror attacks in recent
months. And
tensions surged last night in
Marseilles,
when fights broke out.
Keme Nzerem of Independent
Television News
reports.
KEME NZEREM: This is not what
France needs,
more violence in Marseille,
where England
is playing Russia tomorrow, and
reports spreading
of more trouble between rival
fans and local
youths, like there was last
night.
The problem is, people are
twitchy for another
reason. France is under a state
of emergency,
but last night tens of thousands
danced the
night away at the opening
concert in Paris.
Nearly 100,000 more have flocked
into the
Stade de France for the opening
game.
Yards away, this anonymous side
street. Many
fans will be oblivious to the
secrets it holds,
but not Aca Pavlovic. Last
November, he nearly
died when shrapnel from suicide
bombs strafed
this lamppost and his flesh.
But Aca will be back tonight,
selling scarves
to raise money for survivors
like him.
ACA PAVLOVIC, Attack Survivor
(through translator):
It is a stadium. The game goes
on, and so
does life. People need to
celebrate and go
and see the games. And that
makes me happy.
KEME NZEREM: Into this cauldron
of hopes and
dreams, fans from 24 European
countries are
pouring. But it is France, no
doubt, with
the most at stake.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The month-long
tournament comes
as France is struggling with
strikes by garbage
collectors and public transit
workers.
A wave of religious murders
surged again today
in Bangladesh. A Hindu holy man
was hacked
to death by suspected Islamist
militants in
the country's north. That
follows the killing
of a Hindu priest, and a fatal
attack on a
Christian grocery store owner
earlier this
week. Police have launched a
crackdown, and
detained hundreds of suspects.
Back in this country, the man
they called
Mr. Hockey, Gordie Howe, died
today. He's
considered one of the greatest
players ever.
John Yang has more on his life.
ANNOUNCER: That's right, Gordie
Howe is on
his way to his third goal of
this game.
JOHN YANG: He had some of the
best skills,
and sharpest elbows, in the
game, second on
the all-time scoring list with
801 goals and
winner of four Stanley Cups with
the Detroit
Red Wings. Gordie Howe's 32-year
career spanned
five decades, as The Detroit
Free Press put
it today, from World War II
through Vietnam,
Truman to Carter, Sinatra to the
Sex Pistols.
Canadian Prime Minister Justin
Trudeau spoke
of Howe's legacy.
JUSTIN TRUDEAU, Canadian Prime
Minister: His
career inspired and gave rise to
many, many
dreams and many, many Canadians
of what could
be, what might be.
ANNOUNCER: And Howe was in the
right place
at the right time.
JOHN YANG: Howe was the league's
most valuable
player six times. A gentleman
off the ice,
he was a ferocious competitor on
it. During
his career, he had some 500
stitches to his
face alone.
GORDIE HOWE, Former Professional
Hockey Player:
In my early days, I would yell,
look out,
and then I would hit him. If I
didn't like
him, I would yell out when I hit
him.
JOHN YANG: He retired after the
1971 season,
but came back two years later to
play in the
upstart World Hockey Association
with his
sons Mark and Marty.
ANNOUNCER: Coming up on the
right side, Howe
over the line to his father.
JOHN YANG: They were the only
father-son teammates
in pro sports. Howe called it
the highlight
of his career. He was a
52-year-old grandfather
when he left the game for good.
Howe was diagnosed with dementia
in 2012 and
suffered two strokes in 2014. He
was 88 years
old.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A milestone of a
decidedly
different sort for the first
family, today:
President Obama's oldest
daughter, Malia,
graduated from high school. She
attended the
private Sidwell Friends School
in Washington,
and plans to take a gap year
before starting
college at Harvard.
And Wall Street had its second
off day in
a row, as stocks were hit by
falling oil prices,
and global growth concerns. The
Dow Jones
industrial average lost nearly
120 points
to close at 17865. The Nasdaq
fell 64, and
the S&P 500 slipped 19.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
a funeral
fit for the greatest, Muhammad
Ali; Donald
Trump and Hillary Clinton trade
barbs; a day
in the life of a middle-class
family struggling
to make ends meet; and much
more.
The famous and the anonymous
alike paid tribute
today to Muhammad Ali. Their
final farewell
came in his hometown,
Louisville, Kentucky.
It was a day-long tribute
befitting the man
known as the greatest. Muhammad
Ali began
his final journey at a
Louisville funeral
home. The casket, draped in an
Islamic shroud,
was guided into a hearse by
pallbearers who
included actor Will Smith and
former heavyweight
champion Mike Tyson. A butterfly
symbol, a
nod to Ali's signature phrase,
float like
a butterfly, sting like a bee,
adorned the
windshield.
From there, the 17-car motorcade
wound its
way through Louisville, with
thousands lining
the streets.
CROWD: Ali! Ali! Ali!
WOMAN: His impact transcends
across the world.
It's just a blessing and it
makes us as Louisvillians
proud that he's from our city
and our hometown.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Some even touched
the hearse,
while others ran alongside it.
And the procession
paused at sites of significance,
such as the
Ali Center in downtown
Louisville, and the
boxing legend's childhood home.
The 19-mile procession ended at
Cave Hill
Cemetery on a road strewn with
flower petals.
Muhammad Ali chose the site a
decade ago as
his final resting place, with a
headstone
to be inscribed simply "Ali."
WOMAN: He spoke to the people.
He spoke to
all people. All people came
together regardless
of race and gender and religion.
Everyone
came together.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The burial
service was private,
but 15,000 people turned out for
the public
memorial service that followed.
Ali himself
had requested the event be open
to ordinary
fans, and hundreds of
celebrities, dignitaries
and sports greats joined them.
They ranged from Jesse Jackson
to Arnold Schwarzenegger,
Utah Senator Orrin Hatch, whom
Ali befriended
in the 1980s and who spoke at
the service.
The formal eulogies began with
Ali's widow,
Lonnie:
LONNIE ALI, Widow of Muhammad
Ali: The boy
from Grand Avenue in Louisville,
Kentucky,
grew in wisdom from his
journeys. He discovered
something new, that the world
really wasn't
black and white at all. It was
filled with
many shades of rich colors,
languages and
religions.
And, as he moved with ease
around the world,
the rich and powerful were drawn
to him, but
he was drawn to the poor and the
forgotten.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And there was
comedian Billy
Crystal, dubbed little brother
by the three-time
heavyweight champion. Crystal's
famous 1979
routine "15 Rounds" was about
Ali.
BILLY CRYSTAL, Comedian: It's
great to look
at clips, and it's amazing that
we have them,
but to live in his time,
watching his fights,
experiencing the genius of his
talent, was
absolutely extraordinary. Every
one of his
fights was an aura of a Super
Bowl. He did
things nobody would do. He
predicted the round
that he would knock somebody
out, and then
he would do it.
(LAUGHTER)
BILLY CRYSTAL: He was funny. He
was beautiful.
He was the most perfect athlete
you ever saw,
and those were his own words.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Journalist Bryant
Gumbel met
Ali as a teenager, and in 1991
interviewed
him about the Parkinson's
disease that he
battled for decades.
BRYANT GUMBEL, Journalist: Some
of us like
him took pride in being black,
bold and brash.
And because we were so
unapologetic, we were
in the eyes of many way too
uppity. We were
way too arrogant. Yet we reveled
in being
like him. By stretching
society's boundaries
as he did, he gave us levels of
strength and
courage we didn't even know we
had.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Former President
Bill Clinton
presented Ali with a Citizens
Medal in 2001,
and spoke at the dedication of
the Ali Center
four years later. He gave the
day's final
eulogy.
BILL CLINTON, Former President
of the United
States: I think he decided,
before he could
possibly have worked it all out,
and before
fate and time could work their
will on him,
he decided that he wouldn't be
ever disempowered.
He decided that not his race,
nor his place,
nor the expectations of others,
positive,
negative or otherwise, would
strip from him
the power to write his own
story.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Muhammad Ali died
one week
ago today at the age of 74.
The two presumptive nominees for
president
were in Washington today, each
speaking to
a friendly crowd and trying out
attack lines
aimed at the other.
Political director Lisa
Desjardins reports.
LISA DESJARDINS: It was an
effort to reassure
the religious right, Donald
Trump speaking
to an evangelical Christian
audience at the
Faith and Freedom Coalition's
conference in
Washington.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
We want to uphold the sanctity
and dignity
of life.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
DONALD TRUMP: Religious freedom,
the right
for people of faith to freely
practice their
faith, so important.
LISA DESJARDINS: At the same
time, he tried
to address recent accusations of
racism, including
from some in his own party.
DONALD TRUMP: Freedom of any
kind means no
one should be judged by their
race or their
color and the color of their
skin, shouldn't
be judged that way. And, right
now, we have
a very divided nation. We're
going to bring
our nation together.
LISA DESJARDINS: Trump seemed to
gain ground
with the crowd, if not a full
embrace.
WHITNEY BLOUNT, Conservative
Voter: I came
in a little skeptical, but his
speech was
really what I wanted to hear.
But I continue
to be a little skeptical. But I
am more excited
about the outcome of what a
president could
over Christian voters.
PENNY YOUNG NANCE, Concerned
Women for America:
This is a room full of
conservative voters,
so I think they came into this
ready to vote
for him, but the question now,
but the question
is, how hard will they work for
him?
LISA DESJARDINS: And the
Republican presumptive
nominee tries to shore up his
argument with
the religious right, Hillary
Clinton, she's
pounding away with her base on
the left.
Clinton was also in the nation's
capital,
at a Planned Parenthood event,
giving her
first speech as the Democratic
Party's presumptive
nominee.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
When Donald Trump says let's
make America
great again, that is code for
let's take America
backward, back to a time when
opportunity
and dignity were reserved for
some, not all,
back to the days when abortion
was illegal,
women had far fewer options, and
life for
too many women and girls was
limited.
(APPLAUSE)
LISA DESJARDINS: Last night,
following a day
of endorsements from the
president and vice
president, Clinton also received
the backing
of progressive champion
Massachusetts Senator
Elizabeth Warren.
SEN. ELIZABETH WARREN (D),
Massachusetts:
I am ready to get in this fight
and work my
heart out for Hillary Clinton to
become the
next president of the United
States and to
make sure that Donald Trump
never gets any
place close to the White House.
LISA DESJARDINS: This morning,
the senator
and the candidate met at the
Clintons' Washington
home. Clinton later declined to
respond when
asked if Warren is a potential
running mate.
Clinton hosts a fund-raiser at
her D.C. home
tonight, while Trump holds a
rally in Richmond,
Virginia. Their job now? Excite
their respective
bases enough to come out in
November.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
Mark Shields
and David Brooks on this week's
political
news; and Broadway's landmark
year ahead of
Sunday's Tony Awards.
But, first: the financial
pressures of the
middle class. It's part of what
you're hearing
from voters and on the campaign
trail this
year.
Tonight, we zero in on the case
of a California
family feeling the squeeze. It's
part of our
joint project with American
Public Media's
Marketplace and PBS'
"Frontline," and it's
called How the Deck Is Stacked.
It's funded by the Corporation
for Public
Broadcasting.
The correspondent is the host of
Marketplace,
Kai Ryssdal.
AARON MURRAY, California: Don't
I call my
insurance first to make a claim?
MARY MURRAY, California: Yes. Do
you think
it's totaled?
AARON MURRAY: Yes.
KAI RYSSDAL: This has not been a
good morning
for Aaron and Mary Murray and
Vandy, their
5-year-old daughter. They came
out to find
Aaron's car had been hit
overnight, one of
those unexpected expenses hat
can throw a
lot of middle-class families
off-track.
WOMAN: Thank you for calling
Esurance. My
name is Rebecca. How can I help?
AARON MURRAY: Hello, Rebecca.
I'm calling
because my car got sideswiped. I
did not see
them. They just left a note on
my car, ah,
and the note that they swerved
to avoid a
cat dashing across the street.
WOMAN: OK.
MARY MURRAY: Got to brake for
animals.
KAI RYSSDAL: Things get back on
track, though,
with Mary's car, and they head
to the Los
Angeles Zoo to meet some
friends. Vandy's
really looking forward to the
dinosaurs.
MARY MURRAY: Oh, my gosh.
AARON MURRAY: It's OK. I will
protect you.
MARY MURRAY: Yes, right. He
makes noise. I
think he's real.
KAI RYSSDAL: Over a standard zoo
lunch of
chicken fingers, talk turns back
to that car
accident.
AARON MURRAY: The check goes to
pay off the
car. It doesn't come to me.
KAI RYSSDAL: Next up, groceries
at Target.
And Vandy is eager to help.
VANDY MURRAY, 5 Years Old:
Fruit, taco kit,
and (INAUDIBLE)
MARY MURRAY: Nice. High five.
Boom. Awesome.
KAI RYSSDAL: Mary keeps close
eye on the family
budget. Money-saving apps are
key.
MARY MURRAY: Bread, any bread.
Unlocked. Cha-ching,
25 cents.
AARON MURRAY: All right.
KAI RYSSDAL: The tricky thing
when you're
talking about the middle class
is who exactly
you're talking about. One
definition, according
to the Pew Research Center, is a
family of
four making between $48,000 and
$145,000 a
year, which is basically the
Murrays.
They're both teachers. Household
income is
right at $90,000. And they're
the ones that
politicians talk about all the
time.
Hey, how're you?
AARON MURRAY: Hello.
MARY MURRAY: This is Vandy.
KAI RYSSDAL: Hi, Vandy. How are
you sweetie?
You good?
Crazy day today?
AARON MURRAY: Yes.
KAI RYSSDAL: You walked out to
-- what, Aaron,
you walked out to get your
laptop?
AARON MURRAY: Yes, I had been
sideswiped this
morning. Like, the rear axle's
broke. It is
-- I mean, this is...
(LAUGHTER)
MARY MURRAY: Yes. And that's
part of it.
KAI RYSSDAL: Is that part of the
wheel?
AARON MURRAY: Yes, that's the
wheel.
MARY MURRAY: The tow truck's
here.
KAI RYSSDAL: How big of a pain
is this, other
-- you're insured, but...
AARON MURRAY: Exactly. That's
exactly it.
I'm insured, but even if they
pay everything
out, I now don't have a new car.
Do we get
a new car? How do we find the
money to get
the down payment? Like, that's
really the
big thing.
KAI RYSSDAL: So, what's that
going to do to
your monthly budget?
AARON MURRAY: This month is
shot, right? This
month is shot. Next month is
shot. I'm a teacher.
I don't get paid over the
summer.
KAI RYSSDAL: As you try to get
ahead, this
is like two steps back, maybe
more.
AARON MURRAY: Yes.
They say they're going to cover
everything,
but covering everything is never
everything.
KAI RYSSDAL: Our family, the
Murrays, they
make $90,000 a year.
JENNIFER PATE, Loyola Marymount
University:
Yes. Yes.
KAI RYSSDAL: Now, granted, they
live in L.A.,
an expensive part of the
country. Housing
is ridiculous.
JENNIFER PATE: Yes.
KAI RYSSDAL: They're
middle-class, right?
JENNIFER PATE: They would be,
yes, by definition.
KAI RYSSDAL: Jennifer Pate is an
economist
at Loyola Marymount University.
When we hear politicians and
others say the
middle class in America is being
hollowed
out, what does that mean? It
means it's getting
smaller?
JENNIFER PATE: Yes. People are
either going
up, which is called upward
mobility, or more
likely it's downward mobility.
We're seeing
a hollowing out of the middle.
These are people
who purchase goods and services
across the
year that leads to higher
economic prosperity
in our country. What do families
do when they
struggle?
KAI RYSSDAL: They don't spend,
right? They
retrench.
JENNIFER PATE: They spend less.
They sometimes
have to take jobs that have
better security,
but pay lower wages. Wages have
been stagnant
in real terms roughly since the
mid-'70s.
KAI RYSSDAL: Our family, the
Murrays, they're
teachers, they're hustling to
get by. Getting
their car wrecked wasn't in
their budget.
JENNIFER PATE: Yes.
When you're living very close to
your means,
or just barely living within
your means, when
you have a catastrophic events,
right, something
like having your car get totaled
unexpectedly,
that disproportionately weighs
on you.
MARY MURRAY: I don't feel middle
class. I
would like to feel middle class.
I don't.
I hardly even feel like an
adult.
KAI RYSSDAL: We asked the
Murrays whether
they expected things to turn out
like this.
MARY MURRAY: In my best
remembrance, we actually
had planned on, like, having
bought a house,
even here in L.A. We were going
to have somebody's
loans paid off.
AARON MURRAY: Yes, and I would
be done with
my master's program, and in a
teaching job
for LAUSD.
KAI RYSSDAL: All right, so run
me through
that. How'd we do?
MARY MURRAY: No loans are paid
off. We do
not have a house.
AARON MURRAY: I hate to say
student loans
are the only reason, but they
are a large
reason. I could have purchased a
house for
the amount of my student loans.
KAI RYSSDAL: Are there months
you choose not
to pay bills?
MARY MURRAY: I have from time to
time chosen
not to pay something or to skip
something.
I never skipped the rent. I
never skipped
the car payment. I never skipped
the insurance.
KAI RYSSDAL: When you look at
this election...
AARON MURRAY: Yes.
KAI RYSSDAL: ... do you feel
like the politicians
and the campaigns and the
candidates are paying
attention to your situation?
Hillary Clinton
talks about the middle class all
the time.
Donald Trump has a middle-class
element in
his platform.
MARY MURRAY: Yes. But I don't
think they see
the reality of the middle class.
I think that
there's a -- like, there's an
idea of what
middle class is, which I think
middle class
is, you don't live paycheck to
paycheck.
KAI RYSSDAL: Do you think your
fortunes are
going to change based on this
election?
MARY MURRAY: I don't.
KAI RYSSDAL: Maybe a better
question, though,
is what about the fortunes of
their daughter?
Are you two setting Vandy up to
be better
off than you are right now?
MARY MURRAY: I hope so. I don't
really know.
AARON MURRAY: When you say save
money, cut
this out, don't do that, it
doesn't always
work that way, because the one
person I do
have the hardest time saying no
to is my daughter.
If she says, let's -- can we go
to Pinkberry,
and we say no because we only
have $50 left
for the rest of the month,
that's kind of
hard.
KAI RYSSDAL: Yes.
MARY MURRAY: Yes. She loves
going to gymnastics.
That's not negotiable.
AARON MURRAY: Yes.
MARY MURRAY: That is something
that we pay
every month for her. She loves
it, and we
did cut out a lot of things so
that she could
do that.
KAI RYSSDAL: This isn't a story
or a series
about one family. It's about an
economy that's
changing, and what it means when
something
as simple as your car getting
sideswiped can
set you back on your heels.
The middle class is what makes
this economy
go, the Murrays and the millions
of families
like them being able to buy
stuff. It's almost
that basic. And if they're
getting squeezed,
if the deck is stacked, then
everybody's going
to feel it.
For the "PBS NewsHour," this is
Kai Ryssdal
from Los Angeles, California.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A historic week
for Hillary
Clinton. Bernie Sanders stays in
the race,
but pledges his support. And
Donald Trump's
campaign tries to recover from a
stumble.
That brings us to the analysis
of Shields
and Brooks. That's syndicated
columnist Mark
Shields and New York Times
columnist David
Brooks.
Welcome to you both.
So, let's talk a little bit
about the history.
It took, what, just 240 years,
but we do now
have a woman as the nominee for
president
of a major political party.
Did you feel the history, David,
this week?
DAVID BROOKS: Weirdly not. Maybe
I'm a chauvinist
or something.
But, you know, obviously, the
transformation
of the role of women is the
biggest event
of our lifetime. It's the
biggest transformation
after thousands of years of
human history
to getting closer to equality on
that front.
But Hillary Clinton, it was so
long in coming,
it didn't, to me, feel like the
big seismic
shift, frankly, the way Barack
Obama felt
in '08, I think because she's
such a familiar
figure and because the social
trend has been
gradual in coming, that it
didn't feel like
sort of this huge, momentous
breakthrough
moment.
And I think it's in part because
-- and this
maybe speaks well of the
situation we're in
-- it wasn't like a feminist
tide. It was
a tide of her own grit, a lot of
issues, the
Democratic establishment. If you
polled Sanders
voters vs. Clinton voters,
Sanders voters
were more likely to think there
was structural
discrimination against women
than Clinton
voters.
And so she rode on the tide of
merit, on issues,
but not necessarily a feminist
tide. And so
this particular event didn't
feel a seismic
opening, at least to me, that,
say, the Obama
did -- thing did.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark?
MARK SHIELDS: I'm a feminist.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: No.
Golda Meir is my guide on this.
The only woman
prime minister of Israel said
that women are
better than men, I cannot say,
but what I
can say is they certainly are
not worse.
And I think we have come to that
point of
equality in our politics. I have
to confess
that, 32 years ago, when
Geraldine Ferraro
was named by Walter Mondale, I
was emotional.
I thought of my mother. I
thought of my wife.
I thought of my daughter. I
thought -- it
was just very in large part, I
think, because
-- David said it -- it was such
a surprise.
It was such a pioneer. And this
has been.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This was less of
a...
MARK SHIELDS: This was. And
Hillary Clinton
has been a formidable,
significant political
figure and actor for 25 years.
And -- but there was genuine
emotion in that
hall. You could feel it if you
watched it,
when she accepted that
nomination, and she
obviously reciprocated it. But
it was done
not just as a sisterhood is
powerful campaign.
It was a political campaign and
it was an
effective one.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let's bring
it down to
the politics of it.
Quite a good week for the
Democrats, whether
it was history or not, David.
You had Hillary
Clinton finished. She won
California, pretty
big margin. She got the
president's endorsement.
She got the endorsement of the
vice president.
Bernie Sanders is not getting
out of the race,
but he now is signaling he's
going to support
her.
Democrats seem to have pulled it
together
this week. What did you make of
that?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, California
was a big one.
If she had lost California, then
we have a
whole different gestalt. We
don't have a different
nominee, but we have a different
feeling to
the whole thing.
And so winning California,
winning very convincingly,
is a reminder, for all that we
have been surprised
by Sanders, she did win this.
She won it cleanly
and in a big way over the whole
course of
the primary season. And so she
clearly deserves
to be the nominee. And the
Democratic big
chieftains are coming together
now.
The questions I would have for
Clinton are
that people are coming together,
and they're
uniting and they're strong,
people like Warren,
but this is not a year where the
establishment
is doing particularly well with
the voters.
And so I'm not sure how much it
will help
her in the campaign.
And while Trump's poll numbers
are really
taking a hit, hers are sort of
steady and
they're not steady at a great
place. In three-way
races -- I'm really struck by
the three-way
races all the sudden, where
she's at 39 or
40, and Trump is at like 35, and
then suddenly
Gary Johnson, Libertarian
candidate, is like
at a 10.
And one can see there is so much
dissatisfaction
with those two that if Johnson
could run a
good campaign, he could stick
around in the
double digits and really he will
be a big
story as we talk about the rest
of the year.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How much do you
think, Mark,
the fact that they sort of --
the White House
orchestrated this, this week, in
a way that
they just -- they gave Bernie
Sanders gave
the space to get out when he
wants to.
MARK SHIELDS: Democrats,
historically, when
they form a firing squad, from a
circle. This
was a total exception.
It was brilliantly
choreographed. In addition
to the president's endorsement,
a man not
noted for his self-doubt, to say
that she
was the most qualified
presidential candidate
in his lifetime was quite an
admission and
statement.
I thought the other part of it,
Judy, was
the deference and respect and
space they gave
-- given to Bernie Sanders, that
he's paid
homage, he's paid tribute, and I
think deservedly
so. He lost the nomination, but
he won the
future of the Democratic Party.
And I think the awareness of
this and the
awareness of the need for him
not to be a
Gene McCarthy, as Gene McCarthy
was in 1968
when Hubert Humphrey lost the
presidency to
Richard Nixon by 511,000 votes,
and Gene McCarthy
waited, the great anti-war
candidate, until
six days before the election to
endorse Humphrey,
when, undoubtedly, that would
have made a
difference in the outcome.
And Bernie Sanders is not going
to play this
role. I think -- I think all of
that was good
and positive and encouraging.
And the idea
that the Democrats are going to
have a peaceful
convention, they're on the love
boat now.
A week ago, it looked like a
civil war, or
two weeks ago.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yes.
MARK SHIELDS: And the
Republicans, who looked
were going to have a boring
convention, now
there's a restiveness and
restlessness in
the ranks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, the two of
you have been
saying, I think, for some weeks
that you don't
think Hillary Clinton has a
single message
for her campaign. And, David,
you were just
hinting that that is still the
case.
Where do you come down, Mark?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, she doesn't.
The reality is, this is a change
election
year. As popular as Barack
Obama, and he's
at 51 percent favorable rating,
some -- four
out of five American voters want
the country
to head in the right, a
different direction.
They're not satisfied with the
economy. Barack
Obama could not win a third term
on a referendum.
He could if he was running
against Donald
Trump. But -- so, there's a
change -- you
know, after two terms, there's a
desire for
change in the country. And
Hillary Clinton
is a candidate of continuity.
And that's a
problem. And her message as of
now is the
change of Donald Trump is so
reckless and
so dangerous, that I am the safe
and sensible
alternative.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is that enough?
DAVID BROOKS: Oh, yes, probably.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
I mean, people -- I still sense
people will
be sick of Donald Trump and they
will go for
her. At least she will be
competent and she
will be normal. But one -- it's
not sufficient
for the country. It's enough
politically.
But it's not sufficient for --
as Sanders
even spoke this week, I was
really struck
by how he opened the campaign
really well
with a core message.
But the message just sat there.
He had the
same message from beginning to
end, the same
few talking points from
beginning to end.
It would have been interesting
to know, if
he had expanded that message or
taken it the
next step, a different kind of
issues, if
he would have done better.
But Clinton has not had those
issues. And
her incrementalism is not
sufficient, as Mark
said. And what will be
interesting, if she
can take some of the left-wing
policies -- one
of the things we have seen from
Trump is how
ideologically flexible the
country is right
now, that they just want
different, and they're
willing to grab from column A
and column B.
Trump is a flawed messenger, but
if Clinton
could grab some column A from
the left column
and some unpredictable things
from the right
column that could appeal like to
the family
we just saw in Kai's piece,
suddenly, that's
a real message.
But, as I say, a lot of this is
characterological.
We just haven't seen imagination
from her
over the course of her political
campaign.
We have seen determinedness,
industriousness,
but we haven't seen the
unexpected.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let's talk
about Trump.
He has had a really bad week, as
his campaign
has gone.
Mark, he really has not backed
down from the
comments he made about the judge
of Hispanic
heritage, Mexican heritage. And
you see the
Republican Party struggling to
try to figure
out what to do about it. What
shape is he
in right now?
MARK SHIELDS: He's in bad shape.
And I say that, Judy, because
think about
this, if you're a Republican. A
week ago,
the Democrats had a terrible,
terrible week.
The inspector general's reports
from the State
Department came through on
Hillary Clinton's
private e-mail. It showed that
the Clinton
people had disassembled, that
they had not
cooperated, that they had
actually made it
more difficult for the
investigation and had
not been forthcoming.
But, in addition to that, we had
the worst
job creation numbers we'd had in
six years.
And yet Donald Trump dominated
the news the
whole week, and Hillary Clinton
made the news
and dominated it in a positive
sense with
her speech critical of him.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
MARK SHIELDS: So, you know,
Donald Trump now
is going to a teleprompter, as
we saw today
and we saw on election night.
Donald Trump on a teleprompter
is about as
electrifying as the recorded
message you get
calling the airlines and saying,
calls will
be answered in the order by
which they were
received.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: He loses all of
Donald Trump.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David, how much
damage has
been done? Is he going to be
able to pick
himself up and keep going? What
do you see?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, he will be
able to pick
up. There will be ebbs and
flows.
But we have -- he's had so many
bad weeks
with no effect in the polls,
but, this week,
there was an effect in the
polls. So, he was
dropped, I don't know, six, 10
points. There
was a chunk down.
And then the flaking way of the
Republicans,
the Ryans and even the Mitch
McConnells are
beginning to grow wobbly, Scott
Walker. The
whole party is, like, oh, no,
what are we
going to do?
And I understand why Ryan is
trying to hang
in there. He wants unity. His
theory is that,
if we get unified, we will --
that's the only
way we can win as a party. And
his theory
is, I have got a policy agenda.
If I hug Donald
Trump, maybe he will take part
of it, but
if I push him away, he will
never embrace
my agenda, and I care most about
my agenda.
But I think that is unworkable
and frankly
not morally sound, that policy.
It's unworkable
because you can't share a stage
with Donald
Trump. He's not a sharing guy.
He's a sole
figure who doesn't do
collaboration. He doesn't
do reciprocity. He doesn't do
teamwork. And
you can't have unity with a guy
like that.
I wrote in my column today it's
like trying
to hug a tornado. It's just not
going to work,
because you will get what we
just saw. And
it's immoral, or amoral, at
least, because
you can't embrace somebody who
says racist
things because he happens to
agree with your
defense budget.
The character is foundational.
And Ryan is
trying to paper over a moral
chasm with policy.
And it's just not -- it's not
the right thing
to do, in my view.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Pretty tough.
MARK SHIELDS: It was tough. It
was a good
column. And it was -- David said
it well.
Donald Trump, to quote David,
which I'm always
reluctant to do...
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: ... but he has no
horizontal
relationships. And I think
that's true.
Mo Udall, a wonderful
congressman from Arizona,
said, always beware of any
presidential candidate
who doesn't have friends his own
age who can
tell him to go to hell and --
when you're
wrong. And I just don't see that
in Donald
Trump.
I mean, I see a lot of
relationships and a
lot of vertical relationships
and good relationships
with his family. But, I mean, I
think, Judy,
the vote for president is a very
personal
one. And people are going to
make their decisions
based on, as Heraclitus said 25
centuries
ago, character is destiny, and
it will be
in 2012 (sic).
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, he's going
to -- I guess
next week, he is going to try to
talk about
Hillary Clinton's character.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
MARK SHIELDS: OK.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we will see
what he says.
Mark Shields, David Brooks,
thank you both.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Broadway's 70th
annual Tony
Awards air Sunday night with all
eyes on the
musical "Hamilton."
But, as Jeffrey Brown reports,
there are many
more stage productions which may
provide surprises.
JEFFREY BROWN: No question about
it, it was
the year of "Hamilton," and the
hip-hop musical
about America's first treasury
secretary received
a record 16 Tony nominations.
It also took in over a billion
dollars in
ticket sales and helped make
this a profitable,
as well as buzzed-about year on
Broadway.
Another contender in the best
musical category,
"Shuffle Along," with an
all-star cast led
by Audra McDonald, also got much
buzz, even
if it faces tough Tony odds.
In the best play category, "The
Humans" and
"Eclipsed" were among the
standouts. The former
presents a Thanksgiving
gathering where tensions
reach a boiling point and family
fault lines
are exposed.
"Eclipsed," starring Lupita
Nyong'o is a drama
set amidst the Liberian civil
war. The best
revival of a musical category
includes new
takes on two well-known stories.
"The Color
Purple," based on Alice Walker's
Pulitzer
Prize-winning novel, centers on
African-American
women in the 1930s South.
And Tevye and tradition returned
in "Fiddler
on the Roof," first produced on
Broadway in
1964. And in the best revival of
a play category,
famed playwright Arthur Miller
faces off against
himself, as well as others.
There's "The Crucible," about
the Salem Witch
Trials and an allegory of
McCarthyism in later
years, and "A View From the
Bridge," Miller's
1956 drama of a Brooklyn
longshoreman.
And as it happens, both Miller
revivals were
directed by Ivo Van Hove.
And for a further look at a most
interesting
year on Broadway, I'm joined by
Ben Brantley,
chief theater critic for The New
York Times.
Welcome to you.
So, let's start with the
"Hamilton" phenomenon.
There is really no other way to
refer to it,
I guess.
BEN BRANTLEY, Chief Theater
Critic, The New
York Times: No, you can't avoid
it.
Well, there is a song from
"Hamilton," "I
Want to Be in the Room When It
Happens," which
is referring to sort of the
political ambitions
of Aaron Burr. But it became
sort of the mantra
for everyone.
I have never received so many
questions from
people sort of crawling out of
the woodwork
of my past asking if I could get
them tickets,
because they're hard to come by.
(LAUGHTER)
BEN BRANTLEY: And that kind of
feeds the fuel.
And this is one case, though, in
which that
kind of hype is justified. It
really is unlike
anything that's come on Broadway
before and
it's drawing audiences that
Broadway hasn't
really brought in en masse in
many years.
JEFFREY BROWN: One aspect to it
much noted
"Hamilton" and other plays is
the diversity
in theater.
BEN BRANTLEY: The Oscars look
especially pale
by comparison to Broadway this
year.
Well, the point of "Hamilton,"
or one of the
many points of "Hamilton," which
is a multi-leveled
production in so many ways, is
that this country
was founded by immigrants. And
one of the
strokes of genius was casting
all the dead
white founding fathers with very
vital young
men and women of color.
It fuses the language of
hip-hop, sort of
the braggadocio in that, the
energy in that,
the kind of show-off aspect of
it as the natural
language for young people who
would be revolting.
JEFFREY BROWN: OK, other plays
aside from
"Hamilton" this year, right?
Let's talk about the new play
category. And
we mentioned "The Humans" and
"Eclipsed."
What stood out for you?
BEN BRANTLEY: "The Humans" is
lovely. It's
probably an old-fashioned play
in many ways.
But Stephen Karam, he's a very
interesting
playwright. It's perfectly
balanced. It's
a portrait of family
dysfunction, which is
what American plays, significant
American
dramas, tend to be like. But
there's kind
of a nimbus of the supernatural
within it
that suggests that the ghost,
what really
haunts us, the horror, the
monsters, are us.
"Eclipsed" is its own creature.
I never -- I
don't think there has been ever
been a play
like this on Broadway before,
woman playwright,
all-female cast. And it's about
African brides,
basically, who have been
kidnapped by revolutionaries
in a time of civil war. And it's
their very
limited existences and their
hopes of escaping
it.
It's sort of a conventional play
in the way
it's told, but I think it's
really good. And
the accents are thick, the lingo
is thick.
The historical context or the
topical context
is thick in a way that you
really have to
pay attention to follow it. And
when you do,
you're hooked.
A young actress named Cynthia
Erivo in the
musical "The Color Purple,"
which came in
from London, it had been on
Broadway not that
long ago, but this is the
pared-down revival
from John Doyle. And she is
extraordinary.
She plays -- it's based on Alice
Walker's
novel. And she plays a
repressed, young girl
really, who grows into her sense
of herself.
And watching Cynthia Erivo grow
in presence
on stage is like watching a star
being born
before your eyes. It's just
thrilling.
JEFFREY BROWN: Let me ask you
briefly, finally,
to sum up the year.
There's some years where the
talk about Broadway
is, oh, blockbuster musicals,
nothing all
that new and really exciting.
Where do you
think we're at right now?
BEN BRANTLEY: This year,
"Hamilton" is so
singular, that it really does
sort of put
everything else in the shade,
but it's good
that something this original --
and it is
truly original -- is what's
casting that shadow.
Aside from that the fact we had
Ivo Van Hove,
a radically experienced
director, bringing
two Arthur Miller plays to
Broadway, "The
Crucible" and "A View From the
Bridge," and
making them seem so new and so
startling and
so emotionally engaging, in a
way, yes, any
show that contains those, and
"The Humans"
and this great reinvented
revival of "The
Color Purple," it's a season to
give thanks
for.
JEFFREY BROWN: Ben Brantley of
The New York
Times, thanks very much.
BEN BRANTLEY: Thank you for
having me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We will be back
in a moment.
But, first, take this time to
hear from your
local PBS station. It's a chance
to offer
your support, which helps to
keep programs
like ours on
the air.
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online right
now: What's the best way to
ensure financial
security for your family? Think
of your family as a business,
says one of
our Making Sense columnists.
Find eight principles
to guide you
in managing and growing your
family's wealth.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And Gwen Ifill is preparing for
"Washington
Week," which airs tonight on
PBS. And she
has a preview -- Gwen
GWEN IFILL: Thanks, Judy.
Hillary Clinton wins the week,
making history
by clinching the Democratic
nomination, then
rolling out coordinated
high-profile endorsements.
So where does that leave Donald
Trump? Still
defending himself against his
own comments,
while Bernie Sanders works out
his slow-motion
surrender -- all that tonight on
"Washington
Week" -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we will be
watching.
And we will be back, right here
on Monday
with our regular political
analysis from Amy
Walters and Tamara Keith.
That's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Have a great weekend. Thank you,
and good
night.